Professor Peter Hindmarsh: An adrenal
crisis is a medical emergency.
This is recognized by
the emergency services
who give high
priority to attending
a person with adrenal insufficiency.
The key word for
triage after calling this emergency service number
is adrenal insufficiency which
triggers their care pathway.
Preventing an adrenal
crisis is important,
as it carries a high
morbidity and mortality.
So understanding sick day rules and what
to do in situations such as trauma,
or with diarrhoeal problems is important.
This video
covers some of this, but for more detail,
please consult our book
Replacement Therapies
in Adrenal Insufficiency
published by Elsevier.
This contains a lot of information on
emergency pathways, preparing for surgery,
and of course, visiting the dentist.
The cause
of an adrenal crisis is an acute
deficiency of adrenal hormones,
cortisol and aldosterone.
This is often precipitated by a stress,
such as an infection or trauma.
This can occur in people already
diagnosed with adrenal insufficiency,
or as a first presentation of a new case.
In addition, patients receiving or who have
received high doses of glucocorticoids
for other conditions are
also at risk
because their own adrenal
glands are suppressed.
Key features prompting urgent attention
often known as red flags are confusion,
seizures and coma along with low blood
pressure.
The classical
biochemical triad is a low plasma sodium
and raised plasma potassium
levels along with a low blood glucose.
This is illustrated in this diagram which shows
a loss of cortisol on
the left-hand side,
and aldosterone loss on
the right-hand side.
Loss of cortisol leads
to a low blood glucose
or hypoglycemia, and
because of vomiting,
a reduction in blood volume, which is also
contributed to by the loss of aldosterone.
Loss of aldosterone leads to sodium
loss in the urine.
Loss of sodium in this way is associated
with a rise in plasma potassium which can
lead to heart rhythm abnormalities
and cardiac arrest.
Hydrocortisone needs to be given urgently
intravenously,
and the doses are shown over here, in the left column.
The plasma sodium is
best rectified initially
with fluid replacement
and oral fludrocortisone treatment
can be instituted when the
patient can take medications orally.
During illness
we employ a stepped approach.
If there is a raised temperature over 38
degrees but no vomiting,
then double or triple
doses of hydrocortisone
are needed, with
an extra double,
the morning dose given at four AM.
Level two is
when vomiting is present.
If it is more than an hour
since the last dose was administered,
that dose will have been absorbed.
If however, vomiting takes place less than
an hour, then the dose should be repeated.
And if this is vomited
again within an hour
an intramuscular injection
of hydrocortisone should be given,
and the patient should be taken
to accident and emergency for assessment.
If in any doubt, give the intramuscular
injection of hydrocortisone,
as no harm will come of it.
More at
four is designed to keep patients safe
in the early
hours of the morning.
The dose given is double or triple
the first dose of the morning,
and is in addition to the double or triple
morning dose.
This extra dose should be given regardless
of doses taken earlier in the night.
The reason
for more at four is that the circadian
rhythm of cortisol tells
us that cortisol starts
to rise in the blood
from around midnight
reaching a peak between six and seven AM.
Without dosing
schedules for hydrocortisone, replacement
means that at four AM there is a critical
time when the evening dose has worn off.
This means that even
doubling or tripling the evening
dose in illness
will not last long enough
to cover this time period,
which is when most adrenal crisis occur.
So extra dosing is needed during illness.
Incidentally, this graph taken from a
patient with congenital adrenal hyperplasia
includes 17 hydroxyprogesterone
measurements in purple,
and you can see nicely the increased drive
from two to three to the adrenal gland
raising 17 hydroxyprogesterone
from four AM
due to the absence of
cortisol at this time.
Doubling
the dose does not double
the amount of cortisol in the blood.
Even a triple dose in this case
shown in the slide of 30 milligrams
hardly reaches 1200 nanomoles per litre.
It's not until a dose of
50 milligrams is given
that we get double the
cortisol in the blood.
This is because of the
presence of cortisol binding globulin in the blood.
Cortisol binding globulin
or CBG binds cortisol,
and the cortisol we measure in the lab
as a measure of this bound cortisol,
and the cortisol that
is unbound, or free.
CBG binds about 95 percent
of cortisol in the blood,
but it becomes saturated around a
concentration of 500 nanomoles per litre.
If cortisol exceeds 500
nanomoles per litre,
then the amount that
is free will increase.
But because free cortisol is easily removed
by the kidneys and passed out in the urine,
the actual rise in cortisol is
less than expected.
However,
doubling or tripling the dose is important
because when temperature in the body
increases, less cortisol is bound to CBG.
So for example, in tonsillitis the increase
in temperature locally in the tonsils,
which means more cortisol
falls of CBG in the tonsils,
there's a greater local
effect without exposing
the rest of the body to
high cortisol levels.
But we need the extra hydrocortisone to
allow for this clever process to take
place in the tonsils
so double or tripling the dose is needed.
The key
points from this video are summarized here.
An adrenal crisis can occur in anyone who
becomes unwell,
so knowing what to do
when sick is important.
In level one there is sickness
with a temperature above 38 degrees
and no vomiting,
double or triple dosing is needed.
In level two there is sickness
with a temperature above 38 degrees
and also vomiting.
If the vomiting takes
place one hour after the
hydrocortisone dose has
been administered,
the medication is likely to have been
absorbed and no repeat dose is needed.
If vomiting occurs within an hour,
then the dose should be repeated.
If vomiting occurs again
within one hour,
an intramuscular injection
of hydrocortisone is needed
and the person should go straight
to accident and emergency for assessment.
Give an extra double strip or triple
dose around four AM in all situations.
Double or triple dosing
is needed to maintain
good delivery of cortisol to
the areas of inflammation.
We can't cover everything in this
particular video.
But detailed information on when to double
or triple a dose is available in our book
Replacement Therapies in Adrenal Insufficiency published by Elsevier.
This includes flow diagrams on how to
handle diarrhoea, dental procedures, burns,
trauma and other aspects of emergency
care along with dealing with surgery.